---
layout: article
title: "Puzzle Driven Development"
date: 2009-03-04 16:52:26
author:
  name: Yegor Bugayenko
  avatar: http://www.gravatar.com/avatar/70942ffdd8084b5a51e17e3c0996d53c?s=300
categories: blog
permalink: pdd
disqus: true
tags: pdd
---

PDD is a method of breaking down a programming task into
smaller ones, and enabling their implementation in parallel.
PDD method is widely used in XDSD methodology. The method is
pending USPTO patent
(application no. [12/840,306](http://www.google.com/patents/US20120023476)).

Let's review the method by example. You are a programmer and you
have a task to design and implement a Java class. This is
a formal task description: "class `DBWriter` has to extend `java.io.Writer`
abstract class and save all incoming data into the database".

You have one hour to implement this task. It is obvious that one hour
is not enough, because the problem is bigger than this time slot,
and there are a number of unknowns:

 * What information we need to save, in what format?
 * What is the DB schema? Is it SQL or NoSQL database?
 * How to connect to the DB? JDBC? JPA? DAO?
 * How to handle exceptions?

Let's keep all this unknowns in mind and try to solve the problem
on the highest level of abstraction. Of course, we start with a test:

{% highlight java %}
import org.junit.*;
import static org.mockito.Mockito.*;
public class DBWriterTest {
  @Test
  void testSavesDataIntoDatabase() throws Exception {
    DataBridge mapper = mock(DataBridge.class);
    Writer writer = new DBWriter(mapper);
    try {
      writer.write("hello, world!");
    } finally {
      writer.close();
    }
    verify(mapper).insert("hello, world!");
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

In this test, we defined an expected behavior of the class.
The test will fail to compile because there are two classes
missed: `DataBridge` and `DBWriter`. Let's implement
the bridge first:

{% highlight java %}
import java.io.IOException;
public interface DataBridge {
  void insert(String text) throws IOException;
}
{% endhighlight %}

And the writer itself:

{% highlight java %}
import java.io.IOException;
import java.io.Writer;
import java.utils.Arrays;
public class DBWriter implements Writer {
  private DataBridge bridge;
  public DBWriter(DataBridge brdg) {
    this.bridge = brdg;
  }
  @Override
  void flush() throws IOException {
  }
  @Override
  void close() throws IOException {
  }
  @Override
  void write(char[] cbuf, int off, int len) throws IOException {
    String data = new String(Arrays.copyOfRange(cbuf, off, off + len));
    this.bridge.insert(data);
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

The problem is solved. We successfully designed, implemented
and tested the required `DBWriter` class, which immediately
can be used "as is" by other classes.

Of course, the implementation is not finished, since we are not
writing anything to the database, and we aren't answering
the majority of questions asked above. We still don't know how
exactly the database has to be connected, whether it's SQL or NoSQL,
what is the right data format, etc.

However, we've already made a number of important
architectural assumptions, which allowed us
to implement the class and made it usable by other classes.

Now it's time to identify the unknowns in our code and
mark them with puzzles. Every puzzle is a request for refinement.
We want to ask someone else to help us to refine and correct
our assumptions. Here is the first puzzle we want to add:

{% highlight java %}
public interface DataBridge {
  /**
   * @todo #123 I assumed that a simple insert() method will be
   *  enough to insert data into the database. Maybe it's
   *  not true, and some sort of transaction support will be
   *  required. We should implement this interface and create
   *  an integration test with a database.
   */
  void insert(String text) throws IOException {
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

The puzzle has three elements: `@todo` tag, `#123` locator,
and a comment. Locator says the following:
"The puzzle was created while working with ticket #123".

Let’s add one more puzzle:

{% highlight java %}
void write(char[] cbuf, int off, int len) throws IOException {
  // @todo #123 I assumed that the data should be sent to the database
  //  as they are received by the writer. Maybe this assumption
  //  is wrong and we should aggregate data into blocks/chunks
  //  and then send them to the data bridge.
  String data = new String(Arrays.copyOfRange(cbuf, off, off + len));
  this.bridge.insert(data);
}
{% endhighlight %}

This puzzle indicates one of our concerns, since we are
not sure that the architectural decision is right. Actually,
the design is very primitive at the moment and very likely is wrong.
To refine it and refactor we need more information from the task specifier.

The task is finished. Now you can reintegrate your branch into
`master` and return the ticket back to those who assigned it to you.
His task now is to find other people who will be able
to resolve the puzzles we just created.

Every puzzle created now will produce other puzzles, which
will be resolved by other people. Thus, our small task of 1 hour size
may generate hundreds of other tasks, which will be resolved in days
or even years. However, your goal, while working with your particular
task, is to finish it as soon as possible and reintegrate
your branch into `master`.

## Best Practices

There are a few simple rules that help you to place puzzles correctly.

First of all, you should put your `@todo` annotations where
your code hits a stub. For example, in a unit test.
You're implementing a test, it fails because the class is not
yet implemented. You skip the test with `@Ignore` annotation
and add `@todo` puzzle to its Javadoc.

Second, your puzzle should stay as close as possible to the code
element that is hitting the stub. Say, you have a unit test that
has three test methods. All of them fail now because the class
is not implemented. The best approach would be to ignore every one
of them and create three (!) puzzles. Every one of them should explain
what do you expect from the class and how it should be implemented.

Third, be as descriptive as possible. Your puzzle will soon
be a task definition for someone else. So, explain what do you
expect that other person to implement, how, which documentation to use, etc.
There should be enough information to implement your required
classes without your help!

